.TH NSHELL 1 "2026-06-21" "nshell 0.3.3" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
nshell \- a modern, fish-inspired interactive shell written in Common Lisp
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nshell
.RB [ \-\-help ]
.RB [ \-\-version ]
.RB [ \-c
.IR COMMAND ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nshell
is an interactive command-line shell that emphasizes the interactive
experience: real-time syntax highlighting, history-aware autosuggestions,
fish-style abbreviations, and a fast, context-aware completion engine.
.PP
When started with standard input connected to a terminal,
.B nshell
runs an interactive read-eval-print loop. Otherwise it reads commands from
standard input in batch mode. With
.BR \-c ,
it executes a single
.I COMMAND
and exits.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version information and exit.
.TP
.BI \-c " COMMAND" "\fR, \fB\-\-command " COMMAND
Execute
.I COMMAND
once in batch mode and exit with its status.
.SH KEY BINDINGS
By default the line editor uses Emacs-style key bindings, including cursor
motion (\fBC\-a\fR, \fBC\-e\fR, \fBM\-f\fR, \fBM\-b\fR), editing (\fBC\-k\fR,
\fBC\-u\fR, \fBC\-w\fR, \fBC\-y\fR), undo (\fBC\-_\fR), incremental history
search (\fBC\-r\fR), and autosuggestion acceptance (\fBRight\fR, \fBC\-f\fR).
.PP
Setting the environment variable
.B NSHELL_VI_MODE
to a non-empty value (other than 0/false/no) enables vi key bindings: press
.B ESC
to enter normal mode, which supports motions (\fBh l 0 ^ $ w b e\fR), insert
entries (\fBi a I A\fR), edits (\fBx D C s\fR), operators (\fBdd cc dw cw\fR),
and \fBj\fR/\fBk\fR for history.
.SH EXPANSIONS
.B nshell
performs, in order, brace expansion (\fB{a,b}\fR, \fB{1..5}\fR), tilde
expansion (\fB~\fR), arithmetic expansion (\fB$((expr))\fR), variable and
parameter expansion, command substitution (\fB$(cmd)\fR and fish-style
\fB(cmd)\fR), and globbing (\fB* ? [\&.\&.\&.]\fR).
.PP
Parameter expansion supports \fB${VAR}\fR, defaults \fB${VAR:-word}\fR and
relatives (\fB:= :+ :?\fR), length \fB${#VAR}\fR, prefix/suffix stripping
(\fB${VAR#pat} ## % %%\fR), and substitution (\fB${VAR/pat/rep} //\fR).
.PP
Double quotes suppress globbing and word-splitting but allow variable,
arithmetic, and command-substitution expansion; single quotes are fully
literal. File-descriptor redirections \fB2> 2>> 2>&1 &> &>>\fR and the usual
\fB> >> <\fR are supported, as are pipelines (\fB|\fR), logical operators
(\fB&& ||\fR), sequencing (\fB;\fR), and background execution (\fB&\fR).
.SH CONTROL FLOW
Fish-style control flow is available: \fBif\fR, \fBfor\fR, \fBwhile\fR,
\fBswitch\fR, \fBbegin\fR/\fBend\fR, and user-defined \fBfunction\fRs. A
function's arguments are available as \fB$argv\fR and indexed \fB$argv[N]\fR.
.SH BUILTINS
.B nshell
provides the following builtins:
.BR alias ,
.BR abbr ,
.BR bg ,
.BR cd ,
.BR complete ,
.BR contains ,
.BR count ,
.BR disown ,
.BR echo ,
.BR exec ,
.BR exit ,
.BR export ,
.BR false ,
.BR fg ,
.BR function ,
.BR help ,
.BR history ,
.BR jobs ,
.BR ls ,
.BR not ,
.BR pwd ,
.BR read ,
.BR seq ,
.BR set ,
.BR source ,
.BR string ,
.BR test ,
.BR true ,
.BR type ,
.BR which .
Run
.B help
inside the shell for details.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NSHELL_VI_MODE
When set to a non-empty value, enables vi key bindings (see KEY BINDINGS).
.TP
.B HOME
Used for tilde expansion.
.TP
.B PATH
Searched for external commands.
.SH EXAMPLES
Run a one-off pipeline:
.RS
.EX
nshell \-c 'echo hello | string upper'
.EE
.RE
.PP
Iterate over a generated sequence:
.RS
.EX
for i in (seq 1 5); echo $i; end
.EE
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B nshell
exits with the status of the last command executed, or 0 on a clean
interactive exit.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fish (1),
.BR bash (1),
.BR zsh (1)
.SH BUGS
Report issues at <https://github.com/takeokunn/nshell/issues>.
.SH AUTHORS
The nshell authors.
